Timing and hippocampal information processing

Timing is a key component in hippocampal encoding of space. I will discuss three lines of work related to this theme. First, I will describe the fine-timescale characteristics of single neurons in hippocampal subregion CA1, where theta oscillations organize groups of neurons into orderly sequences. While theta was once thought to be synchronized throughout CA1, it was recently shown instead to be offset in time along the long axis of the hippocampus. Considering distant pairs of neurons, our fundamental sequence spiking property may instead be systematically staggered by these offsets in the rhythms that pace them. I tested the impact of theta wave time offsets by recording place cell spike sequences from groups of neurons in distant parts of CA1, and found that place cell sequences more closely coordinate with each other than the underlying theta oscillations do. In regions that differ from one another by 13 milliseconds of theta delay, place cell sequences are typically aligned to within 5 milliseconds. This raises the possibility that theta wave offsets serve another purpose, perhaps timing the communication with brain areas connected to different parts of CA1, while compensatory mechanisms are in place to preserve the fine temporal alignment of place cell spatial information.

Second, in collaboration with Hector Penagos I investigated the interaction between hippocampus and cortical brain areas that are thought to coordinate during cognition and memory consolidation. Prior work has found various coordinated activity patterns in hippocampus and sensory cortex during slow wave sleep, but fewer such connections have been found in waking, perhaps because sensory cortex is not as involved with hippocampal information processing as limbic cortical areas. In recordings from hippocampus and the limbic retrosplenial cortex, we observed that retrosplenial cortex regularly returns to a sleep-like activity pattern during fully awake consummatory states, when hippocampus does the same. This could provide a window for hippocampal-cortical consolidation previously thought to occur during sleep while integrating the cognitive and perceptual features of wake.

Finally, I will describe a tool for closed-loop experiments using information decoded from hippocampal ensembles. Place cell activity is typically extracted and analyzed only after an experiment has ended. But interrogating the timing of hippocampal information, enhancing or interfering with it, requires decoding that information immediately. I will discuss some of the difficulties and the eventual implementation of a system capable of sequence time-scale position decoding and then survey the future experimental applications.